14.0 manage a financial budget dopi (#3049)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/finance/accounting/others/adviser/budget.rst

   must have at least one.

Use case
========

Let’s illustrate this with an example.

We just started a project with *Smith & Co*, and we would like to budget the income and expenses of
that project. We plan on having a revenue of 1000, and we don’t want to spend more than 700.

First, we need to define what accounts relate to our project’s expenses. Go to
:menuselection:`Configuration --> Management: Budgetary positions`, and click :guilabel:`New` to add
a position. Add the accounts wherein expenses will be booked.

.. image::  budget/smith-and-co-expenses.png
   :align: center
   :alt: display the Smith and Co expenses

Let's repeat the steps to create a budgetary position that reflects the revenue.

.. image::  budget/smith-and-co-revenue.png
   :align: center
   :alt: display the Smith and Co revenue

Analytical accounts
-------------------

Odoo needs to know which costs or expenses are relevant to a specified budget, as the above general
accounts may be used for different projects. Go to :menuselection:`Configuration --> Analytic
Accounting: Analytic Accounts` and click :guilabel:`New` to add a new **Analytic Account** called
*Smith & Co*.

> The :guilabel:`Plan` field has to be completed. Plans group multiple analytic accounts, they are
> used to distribute costs and benefits to analyse business performance. :guilabel:`Analytic Plans`
> can be created or configured by going to :menuselection:`Configuration --> Analytic Accounting:
> Analytic Plans`.

Reviewer: l60: this should be divided either with ";" or "."
l61: just a suggestion: "are used to" can be removed, analyze (American en), Analytical plans is the concept, not something on-sceen so "**"
l62: don't forget the app name in menuselection except if it is part of a flow (not the case here) --> please check all menuselection because I've seen it before as well
```suggestion
The :guilabel:`Plan` field has to be completed. Plans group multiple analytic accounts; they
distribute costs and benefits to analyze business performance. **Analytic Plans** can be
created or configured by going to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Analytic
Accounting: Analytic Plans`.
```

When creating a new customer invoice and/or vendor bill, you have to refer to this analytic account.

.. image:: budget/analytic-accounts.png
   :align: center
   :alt: add analytic accounts in a new invoice or bill.

Define the budget
-----------------

Let’s set our targets. We specified that we expect to gain 1000 with this project, and we would like
not to spend more than 700. Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Management: Budgets` and click
:guilabel:`New` to create a new budget for *Smith & Co* project.

First, fill in your :guilabel:`Budget Name`. Then, select the :guilabel:`Period` wherein the budget
is applicable. Next, add the :guilabel:`Budgetary Position` you want to track, define the related
:guilabel:`Analytic Account`, and add the :guilabel:`Planned Amount`.

.. image:: budget/define-the-budget.png
   :align: center
   :alt: budget lines display

.. Note::
   When recording a planned amount related to expenses, the amount must be negative.

Check your budget
-----------------

Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Management: Budgets` and find the *Smith & Co* Project to see
how it evolves according to the expenses or income for the related analytic account.

> The :guilabel:`Practical Amount` evolves when a new journal entry related to an accounts from your

Reviewer: small typo here: an account

budgetary position and your analytic account is created.

The :guilabel:`Theoretical Amount` represents the amount of money you theoretically could have spent
or should have received based on the date. For example, if your budget is 1200 for 12 months
(January to December), and today is 31 of January, the theoretical amount will be 100, since this is

> the actual amount that could have been made.

Reviewer: here's what grammarly suggest: 
For example, suppose your budget is 1200 for 12 months (January to December), and today is 31 of January. In that case, the theoretical amount will be 100 since this is the actual amount that could have been made.

Manage a financial budget
=========================

Managing budgets is an essential part of running a business. Budgets help people become more
intentional with how money is spent and direct people to organize and prioritize their work to meet
financial goals. They allow the planning of a desired financial outcome and then measure the actual
performance against the plan. Odoo manages budgets using both **general** and **analytic accounts**.

Configuration
=============

From the Accounting app, go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings -->
Analytics section` and enable :guilabel:`Budget Management`.

Budgetary positions
-------------------

Budgetary positions are lists of accounts for which you want to keep budgets (typically expense or
income accounts).

To define budgetary positions, go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Management:

> Budgetary Positions` and :guilabel:`New`. Add a :guilabel:`Name` to your budgetary position and

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/85342080/214006035-627f822d-8811-48db-acf6-81be0965972e.png)
I am working in Master

select the :guilabel:`Company` it applies to. Click :guilabel:`Add a line` to add one or more
accounts.

.. note::
   Each budgetary position can have any number of accounts from the chart of accounts, though it
   must have at least one.

Use case
========

Let’s illustrate this with an example.

We just started a project with *Smith & Co*, and we would like to budget the income and expenses of
that project. We plan on having a revenue of 1000, and we don’t want to spend more than 700.

First, we need to define what accounts relate to our project’s expenses. Go to
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Management: Budgetary positions`, and click

> :guilabel:`New` to add a position. Add the accounts wherein expenses will be booked.

Author: not in master

.. image::  budget/smith-and-co-expenses.png
   :align: center
   :alt: display the Smith and Co expenses

Let's repeat the steps to create a budgetary position that reflects the revenue.

.. image::  budget/smith-and-co-revenue.png
   :align: center
   :alt: display the Smith and Co revenue

Analytical accounts
-------------------

Odoo needs to know which costs or expenses are relevant to a specified budget, as the above general
accounts may be used for different projects. Go to :menuselection:`Configuration --> Analytic

> Accounting: Analytic Accounts` and click :guilabel:`New` to add a new **Analytic Account** called

Author: not in master

*Smith & Co*.

The :guilabel:`Plan` field has to be completed. Plans group multiple analytic accounts; they
distribute costs and benefits to analyze business performance. **Analytic Plans** can be created or
configured by going to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Analytic Accounting:
Analytic Plans`.

When creating a new customer invoice and/or vendor bill, you have to refer to this analytic account.

.. image:: budget/analytic-accounts.png
   :align: center
   :alt: add analytic accounts in a new invoice or bill.

Define the budget
-----------------

Let’s set our targets. We specified that we expect to gain 1000 with this project, and we would like
not to spend more than 700. Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Management: Budgets` and click

> :guilabel:`New` to create a new budget for *Smith & Co* project.

Author: still not in master

First, fill in your :guilabel:`Budget Name`. Then, select the :guilabel:`Period` wherein the budget
is applicable. Next, add the :guilabel:`Budgetary Position` you want to track, define the related
:guilabel:`Analytic Account`, and add the :guilabel:`Planned Amount`.

.. image:: budget/define-the-budget.png
   :align: center
   :alt: budget lines display

.. Note::
   When recording a planned amount related to expenses, the amount must be negative.

Check your budget
-----------------

Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Management: Budgets` and find the *Smith & Co* Project to see
how it evolves according to the expenses or income for the related analytic account.

> The :guilabel:`Practical Amount` evolves when a new journal entry related to an account from your
> budgetary position and your analytic account is created.

Reviewer: en ref au training de fp, I'd switch the two groups to make the sentence clearer (ps: did not check with PyCharm for the # of characters)
```suggestion
The :guilabel:`Practical Amount` evolves when a new journal entry related to your analytic account and an account from your budgetary position is created.
```

Manage a financial budget

> =========================

Author: I prefer my title "Manage a financial budget" It is more simple, more like the style of the doc in general

> =========================

Author: I updated the title to "Financial Budget" as per our last talk

> =========================

Author: don't know :D

Budgetary positions` and :guilabel:`Create`. Add a :guilabel:`Name` to your budgetary position.
Each budgetary position can have any number of accounts from the chart of accounts, though it must
have at least one.

Use case
========

Let’s illustrate this with an example: we just started a project with Smith & Co, and we would like
to budget the income and expenses of that project.

We plan to have a revenue of 1000, and we don’t want to spend more than 700.

First, we need to define what accounts relate to our project’s expenses. Go to
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Budgetary positions` and :guilabel:`Create` a
position and add the accounts wherein we will book our expenses.

.. image::  budget/smith-and-co-expenses.png
  :align: center

Now, let's repeat the steps to create a budgetary position that reflects the revenue.

.. image::  budget/smith-and-co-revenue.png
  :align: center

Analytical accounts
-------------------

Odoo needs to know which costs or expenses are relevant to a specified budget because the above
general accounts may be used for different projects. To do so we need to link our invoices and

> expenses to a defined analytical account: Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration -->

Reviewer: invoices and expenses: shouldn't we talk about revenue and expenses for consistency ?

> general accounts may be used for different projects. To do so we need to link our invoices and
> expenses to a defined analytical account: Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration -->
> Analytic Accounts` and :guilabel:`Create` a new :guilabel:`Analytic Account` called Smith & Co.

Reviewer: I made some small suggestions + removed :guilabel: as you are not referring to something specifically written but more to the concept

```suggestion
general accounts may be used for different projects. To do so, we need to link our invoices and
expenses to a defined analytical account: go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration -->
Analytic Accounting --> Analytic Accounts` and :guilabel:`Create` a new **analytic account** called
Smith & Co.
```

Each budgetary position can have any number of accounts from the general ledger (the main chart of
accounts) assigned to it, though it must have at least one.

> 

Reviewer: **Important**: I cannot leave the page without specifying a "plan". Also, this might be relevant in a future comment (regarding purchase lines)

Reviewer: Still nothing said about plan, but it's important since you cannot leave without specifying a plan in Odoo 16 (not necessary in previous version,s though)

Reviewer: Also, I think you forgot to remove that sentence as it as not link to what is explain before and because it is said earlier when you talk about budgetory positions

Define the budget
-----------------

> Let’s now set our targets. We specified that we expect to gain 1000 with this project and we would
> like not to spend more than 700. Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Budgets` and

Reviewer: Don't forget to start the menuselection with the app 

```suggestion
Let’s set our targets. We specified that we expect to gain 1000 with this project, and we would
like not to spend more than 700. Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Accounting --> Budgets` and
```

:guilabel:`Create` a new budget.

> First, fill in your :guilabel:`Budget Name`. Then, select the :guilabel:`Period` wherein the budget
> is applicable. Next, add the :guilabel:`Budgetary Position` you want to track, define the related
> :guilabel:`Analytic Account`, and add the :guilabel:`Planned Amount`.

Reviewer: I think it's important to explain "how to add a budgetary position" 

```suggestion
First, fill in your :guilabel:`Budget Name`. Then, select the :guilabel:`Period` wherein the budget
is applicable. Next, add the :guilabel:`Budgetary Position` you want to track, define the related
:guilabel:`Analytic Account`, and add the :guilabel:`Planned Amount`.

```

.. image:: budget/define-the-budget.png
   :align: center

> 

Reviewer: Do we let it as a draft, confirm, approve, done? What are these status used for?

Author: good point. Clarifications ongoing.

Author: as per discussion with MALB, better to skip this part in the doc as it is probably not up to date...

.. Note::
   When recording a planned amount related to expenses, the amount must be negative.

Check your budget
-----------------

> Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Budgets` and find the Smith & CO Project to see how it evolves.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Accounting --> Budgets` and find the Smith & Co Project to see
how it evolves.

```

.. tip:: If you use analytical accounts remember that you need to specify this analytic account in

>    the invoice and/or purchase line.

Reviewer: This shouldn't be a tip as nothing happens if you don't do it - not a tip but a mandatory step.
   I think you should explain where to add you "analytical accounts"

> 

Reviewer: how do you put anything in "purchase line"? I couldn't find it at any point in the process:
   https://watch.screencastify.com/v/0ilhNM044hplb8F6iBbT
   Do we have to create bill --> journal items --> analytic tab --> select "plan" --> select the
   analytic account. ????

Author: As I showed you :)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/85342080/205954148-03e98e84-6b99-4ffd-8fba-875154acfb8b.png)

Reviewer: <3

> 

Reviewer: Add analytic account in quotation: Other info tab --> Invoicing and Payments section -->
   Analyti Account

Author: not in is when adding a line. I move this part in the Analytical accounts section

.. note::

>    - The :guilabel:`Theoretical amount` represents the amount of money you theoretically could have
>      spend or should have received in function of the date. When your budget is 1200 for 12 months
>      (january to december), and today is 31 of january, the theoretical amount will be 100, since
>      this is the actual amount that could have been realised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The :guilabel:`Theoretical Amount` represents the amount of money you theoretically could have
     spent or should have received based on the date. For example, if your budget is 1200 for 12
     months (January to December), and today is 31 of January, the theoretical amount will be 100,
     since this is the actual amount that could have been made.
```

>    - The :guilabel:`Practical amount` evolves when a new journal entry related to an accounts from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The :guilabel:`Practical Amount` evolves when a new journal entry related to an account from
```

Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Analytic Accounts` and :guilabel:`Create` a
new **Analytic Account** called Smith & Co. You have to refer to this analytic account when creating
a customer invoice and/or vendor bill.

Each budgetary position can have any number of accounts from the general ledger (the main chart of
accounts) assigned to it, though it must have at least one.

Define the budget
-----------------

Let’s set our targets. We specified that we expect to gain 1000 with this project, and we would like
not to spend more than 700. Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Accounting --> Budgets` and
:guilabel:`Create` a new budget.

First, fill in your :guilabel:`Budget Name`. Then, select the :guilabel:`Period` wherein the budget
is applicable. Next, add the :guilabel:`Budgetary Position` you want to track, define the related
:guilabel:`Analytic Account`, and add the :guilabel:`Planned Amount`.

.. image:: budget/define-the-budget.png
   :align: center
   :alt: budget lines display

.. Note::
   When recording a planned amount related to expenses, the amount must be negative.

Check your budget
-----------------

> Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Accounting --> Budgets` and find the Smith & Co Project to see

Reviewer: I noticed you changed the menuselection on line 22 (To define budgetary positions, go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Management:
Budgetary Positions`) to add the section, but not to all of them, can you either add section everywhere or nowhere? (Also, good idea to put ":" since you don't really click the section but just scroll down to it :))

> ow it evolves.

Reviewer: how it evolves according to the invoices and bills related to the analytical account or something like that. Otherwise, we don't know how that magic would happen or how this is related to what was previously said

.. note::
   - The :guilabel:`Theoretical Amount` represents the amount of money you theoretically could have
     spent or should have received based on the date. For example, if your budget is 1200 for 12
     months (January to December), and today is 31 of January, the theoretical amount will be 100,
     since this is the actual amount that could have been made.
   - The :guilabel:`Practical Amount` evolves when a new journal entry related to an accounts from

>      your budgetary position and your analytic account.

Reviewer: I don't think this part should just be a note as it's all you can see on the screen and explanation on how to understand what's on the screen

Author: Indeed, updated
